SOURCES OF VARIATION IN BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT : VENIPUNCTURE

At some convenient time during the examination a venipuncture was done on the examinees by the nurse with the assistance of the dermatologist. This procedure may have had some effect upon the examinees’ blood pressure either elevating it because of apprehension or lowering it because of the removal of 55 cc. of blood.
To determine the effect of the venipuncture on the blood pressures, the examinees were divided into two groups: those with blood pressure measurement taken first and those with venipuncture done first. Both groups were further subdivided by the amount of time that elapsed between the venipuncture and blood pressure determination. The results of this analysis are presented in table IV. Because of the substantial variation in blood pressure with age,
the effect of age was removed by age adjusting the mean blood pressures. The direct method of adjustment was used for this purpose with the weighted population of the United States (November 1972) as the reference population.
It might be expected that some if not all of those who had their blood pressure taken before the venipuncture might be apprehensive about the procedure and consequently show some elevation in pressure if they were aware that they were soon to have the venipuncture done. However, as may be seen in table IV the age-adjusted mean systolic and diastolic pressures of those who had their blood pressures taken less than 20 minutes before they had the venipuncture are, respectively, 1.0 mm.Hg and 3.0 mm.Hg lower, not higher than the systolic and diastolic pressures of those that had 30 minutes or more elapse before having the venipuncture done. The difference between the age-adjusted mean systolic pressures is statistically significant but that for diastolic pressures is not. Therefore, apprehension about the venipuncture was apparently not a significant factor affecting the blood pressures of those that had their blood pressures taken before the venipuncture. The significant elevation in systolic mean pressures among examinees who had their blood pressures taken 30 minutes or more before the venipuncture may be a reflection of the fact that many were measured near the beginning of the examination. In previous Health Examination Surveys the initial blood pressure of an examinee on whom more than one reading was obtained has generally been higher than the subsequent ones, possibly because of apprehension about the examination when the examinees first arrived. Since the time of day each examinee began the examination is not readily available, it is not possible to separate effects of normal variation in blood pressure during the day from those due to apprehension, if any, about the examination.
Although apprehension about the examination or the venipuncture appeared not to bias the estimates in this report, the venipuncture could have caused a hypotensive effect upon the blood pressures of those that had their blood pressure taken shortly after having the venipuncture done. If there was such a hypotensive effect, the mean blood pressure of those on whom these measurements were taken less than 20 minutes after the venipuncture should be lower than those taken 30 minutes or longer afterward. In fact, no significant difference in the age-adjusted mean systolic or diastolic pressures between the two groups was found. Hence, venipuncture apparently did not significantly bias the blood pressure measurements in this examination, whether taken before or afterward.
